---
layout: post
title: "A Physical Analogy of Entropic Optimal Transport"
date: 2024-10-30
mathjax: true
---

Imagine a world, similar to our own, except that rather than there existing just one electric force, there are two forces 
that have identical properties as the electric force of our world: an A force and a B force. 
Associated with each of these forces are A-charged particles and B-charged particles (which we will
abbreviate as A particles and B particles). As these forces are similar to the electric force, they are gradients of scalar potentials
which can be controlled and tuned in the same way that electric potentials can be controlled and tuned.

It's important to emphasize that A particles and B particles are *not* analogous to  positively-charged and negatively-charged particles
of our world. The A force and the B force are completely unrelated; A particles don't feel B forces and vice versa.

Now imagine we have a room in our labratory filled with both A particles and B particles. We know from statistical mechanics that,
given a potential $V$, the probability of finding a particle at location $x$ is proportional to $e^{-\beta V(x)}$. Let's assume that
the X force generated by X particles are small such that the only source of X-potential is the external potential $V_X$ that we
the experimenters can control. As $A$ and $B$ forces don't interact, that means that can control the distribution of $A$ and $B$
particles in the room *independently* by changing the potential fields $V_A$ and $V_B$, respectively.

[Visualization of two types of potential with two distributions of particles]

Mathematically, the joint distribution of $A$ and $B$ particles would be given as

$$p(x,y) =e^{-\beta(V_A(x) + V_B(y))} = e^{-\beta V_A(x)} e^{-\beta V_B(y)} $$

where this should be read as